v3.3: describe behaviour when deserializing a multipart with a Content-Type header (#5391)
OAI/OpenAPI-Specification: src/oas.md

Note that in the case of [Encoding By Name](#encoding-by-name), this value is the array item for properties of type `"array"`, and the entire value for all other types.
Therefore the `array` row in this table applies only to array values inside of a top-level array when encoding by name.

When deserializing a multipart message, if a `Content-Type` header is present in the specific part, its value shall be used instead of these values. Behavior is undefined when both this header and `contentType` are defined but with different values.

> 

Reviewer: @karenetheridge if I am reading this right, the only potential change here is in the case where `contentType` is absent and therefore assumed to have a default value, but the per-part `Content-Type` type contradicts that default value?

I think we can make this fit the compatibility guidelines more cleanly by switching the order of the sentences and changing "shall" to "SHOULD" (or "RECOMMENDED" which means the same thing but fit better in the sentence I'm proposing):

Something like this?  But less awkward with the last part?

```suggestion
When deserializing a multipart message, behavior is undefined when the `Content-Type` header and the `contentType` field have different values.  If the `contentType` field is absent but `Content-Type` is present, it is RECOMMENDED to use the value of `Content-Type`.  However, this behavior is still technically undefined due to the possibility that the `schema` is not structured for the received `Content-Type`.
```

Author: > The only potential change here is in the case where contentType is absent and therefore assumed to have a default value, but the per-part Content-Type type contradicts that default value?

No, I am not presuming that the default value would be considered here at all -- I think the Content-Type header in the message part should be used in preference to that: a value being underspecified means that we do the best with whatever information we do have, and in this case we have a header telling us what type the message sender intends it to be.

Your edit sounds fine, except I would remove the last sentence: the schema may be just fine with the Content-Type (consider the case where encoding/contentType says "text/plain; charset=UTF-8" but the Content-Type header says "text/plain; charset=Shift_JIS"... or application/yaml instead of application/json).

The logic I'm using is:

  - if there is style/explode/allowReserved present, use those;
  - otherwise, check for encoding/contentType AND a Content-Type header:
    - if we have just one or the other, use it;
    - else if we have both, they must match, else generate an error, but still decode with the Content-Type header (because we can presume the message sender knows what they're doing);
    - else (we have neither): do we have a schema for this data location?
      - yes, examine the schema to see what type this should be, and select the media-type on that basis; if it's "text/plain", also apply the charset from any adjacent `_charset_` message part.
      - no: do nothing; leave the payload as a string (and now we start unwinding our recursion as there is nothing more we can do with this part of the messge).

However, while looking at my test cases a little more closely, I'm wondering if it might be more sensible to simply prefer Content-Type over encoding/contentType _without erroring at all_ when the values conflict.  contentType is useful as a recipe for serializing a message, and a hint for how to deserialize when insufficient information is present in the message itself, but when Content-Type _is right there in the message next to the data_, surely we should just go ahead and use it? That's what an application would do in the absence of an OAD telling them what the message should look like.  If the data decodes to the desired result, why should this be an error at all?

\[...and after experimenting with tests, I am convinced this is correct.. it would not be useful to generate an error when we're still able to successfully deserialize the message. The schema is still there as a verification step to catch issues with the deserialized content, and there's a good chance that it came out correctly anyway even if the media-type didn't match what the OAD said the serialization process ought to be using. If a media-type was used that we don't know how to decode, then we can error on _that_ instead.]

Author: (edited to fix some errors; read in web rather than in email)

Reviewer: @karenetheridge 

> I'm wondering if it might be more sensible to simply prefer Content-Type over encoding/contentType without erroring at all when the values conflict.

It might be more sensible (in some cases I'm pretty sure it is more sensible, and it definitely fits more with the architecture of the web where you can have advance hints, but the runtime behavior is always what's real), but it's not the way the OAS is written (or more broadly, the way it is marketed as a way to define an API interface contract).

Our general paradigm is that if the runtime behavior doesn't match the OAD, then that's an error ***[EDIT: except I keep forgetting the "open world" approach, so maybe it's not?  See below]***.  Whether it's an error in the API or the OAD depends on the circumstances, but the general idea is that you should be able to tell when your API and its design contract fail to match.  In theory, whatever the OAD says that contradicts the `Content-Type` is an assertion that the application depends on, so if the OpenAPI tooling to ignores that mismatch, it is likely to cause problems downstream — precisely the sort of problem that a contract is supposed to prevent.

_(note: I just like em-dashes and know how to use them.  No AI was used on this comment 😛 )_

This is a philosophical point that would be worth revisiting in a 4.0.

Author: What should we do about this? Should we add in 3.3 some stricter language that says that `contentType` (or one of the values, if comma-separated) MUST match the part's Content-Type, only to potentially remove it in 4.0? Or just leave it vague for now?

In my testing I also flagged another edge case: `contentType` says `text/plain`, but the Content-Type header says `text/plain; charset=Shift_JIS`. IMO this is not a mismatch; the header is simply being specific about the character encoding, and `contentType` is saying "any text/plain type will do".

Reviewer: You're definitely correct about the `text/plain` not being a mismatch.

Regarding the rest of it... I have to apologize for shifting my views a bit again.  I'm even frustrating myself with this, and it's a good bit of evidence for why we should really nail down the philosophy of the OAS more clearly (which various folks here have attempted to do over the years but we've never quite managed it).

-----

This scenario is nearly analogous to matching (or not) the keys under the `content` field of a Response Object (as that one specifically allows media ranges).  We don't consider failure to match there an error, because many things in OpenAPI take an "open world" view (which is what I was forgetting before): an OAD describes things that can happen, and _if_ they happen, what they should look like.  But other things can also happen, and are not necessarily an error.  So if you get back `application/xml` but don't have a `content` key for that in the Response Object, it's not automatically an error.  It's just a thing you have no information about.

Or at least, this is how it should work in an "open world" view.  But we're not very clear about that being the view, I think.

It's not quite perfectly analogous because at the Response Object level the `content` keys can be related to the `Accept` request header, and there's no way to specify individual part media types in `Accept: multipart/whatever` AFAIK.  And the server is allowed to disregard `Accept` anyway.

So if we look at `contentType` as analogous to the Response Object (or Request Body Object)'s `content` keys, I guess a failed match is not an error?  It's just a thing we don't know much about?

I feel like I've gotten myself confused at this point 😵‍💫

Author: > So if you get back application/xml but don't have a content key for that in the Response Object, it's not automatically an error. It's just a thing you have no information about.

Interesting, that hasn't been my interpretation -- in my implementation, the way to get past a "wrong Content-Type" error is to explicitly provide a media-type entry for "\*/\*" (which matches anything that didn't match anything else).

I also error if there is no defined decoding for the media-type that matched under `content`, unless the schema is empty (`{}` or `true`) or missing entirely -- in these cases the string value of the content is returned without alteration.

Reviewer: > Interesting, that hasn't been my interpretation

Yeah, we're not very clear about it- obviously I forgot in this thread!  But I found [the big conversation about this from a while ago](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/issues/568#issuecomment-186677860) which is interesting.

> is to explicitly provide a media-type entry for "/"

Wouldn't that need to be `*/*` ?  I didn't thin `/` on its own was a valid media type or media range?

> I also error if...

The thing is, we're not all that clear on how this is supposed to work.  That could be a good or bad thing.  It's a good thing in that tools can be set up for a variety of use cases.  "Fail-fast" is good for some use cases, while "if you can more-or-less make it work, keep going" is good for others.

I don't know what we should do here- let's talk about it in the Thursday meeting.

Author: that was `*/*` - markdown ate the \*.

Note that in the case of [Encoding By Name](#encoding-by-name), this value is the array item for properties of type `"array"`, and the entire value for all other types.
Therefore the `array` row in this table applies only to array values inside of a top-level array when encoding by name.

> When deserializing a multipart message, if a `Content-Type` header is present in the specific part, its value shall be used instead of these values. Behavior is undefined when both this header and `contentType` are defined but with different values.

Reviewer: The "shall" should either be a SHALL (or MUST) if we think we can mandate this within 3.2->3.3 compatibility rules, or it should be a SHOULD, noting that the only accepted reason for disregarding the SHOULD would be compatibility.

Author: I think SHALL is fine here.

Author: However the line that comes after it is somewhat redundant and could even be contradictory.  So a bit more revision is needed here.

Note that in the case of [Encoding By Name](#encoding-by-name), this value is the array item for properties of type `"array"`, and the entire value for all other types.
Therefore the `array` row in this table applies only to array values inside of a top-level array when encoding by name.

> When deserializing a multipart message, if a `Content-Type` header is present in the specific part, its value SHALL be used instead of these values. Behavior is undefined when both this header and `contentType` are defined but with different values.

Reviewer 2: In the first sentence, does "these values" mean the default values described in the previous paragraph, or the explicit or default values of the fields of the encoding object? I'm guessing it is only the defaults, since otherwise the first and second sentences seem inconsistent. But I think it would be best to make that clear, e.g. "these values" -> "these default values".

Author: Yes, it's referring to the defaults, as the case of when `contentType` has an explicit value is covered separately. That's a good edit; thanks! (and applied)

> If the `contentType` field is absent but `Content-Type` is present, it is RECOMMENDED to use the value of `Content-Type`.  However, this behavior may produce unexpected results due to the possibility that the `schema` is not structured for the received `Content-Type`.

Reviewer 2: And here I'm confused because if `Content-Type` is present, I think we already said one previous line that its value "SHALL" be used. So why here is it only "RECOMMENDED"? Isn't this inconsistent?

Author: nice catch. we can just delete that whole second sentence.

Author: I'll merge parts of that second sentence with the first, as we ought to be describing the pitfalls of using the Content-Type header in preference to the `contentType` encoding field.

Author: much better. now:

> +When deserializing a multipart message, if a `Content-Type` header is present in the specific part, its value SHALL be used instead of these default values. Behavior is undefined when both this header and `contentType` are defined but with different values; it is RECOMMENDED to use the value of `Content-Type`. However, this behavior may produce unexpected results due to the possibility that the `schema` is not structured for the received `Content-Type`.

##### Handling Multiple `contentType` Values

> When multiple values are provided for `contentType`, parsing remains straightforward as the part's actual `Content-Type` is included in the document; it SHOULD match one of the media types in `contentType`, if it is present.

Reviewer: I think that with the re-ordered sentences above, this is not necessary as it is simply a consequence of the other statement.  It's not entirely clear to me that we can put a SHOULD on the API behavior, though.  I think we can only put SHOULDs on our side of things.  We should maybe look and see if we have other SHOULDs that impact API behavior rather than OAS tool behavior — If we already do, then I'm perfectly happy for us to add another.

Author: > It's not entirely clear to me that we can put a SHOULD on the API behavior, though. I think we can only put SHOULDs on our side of things

I'm not sure what you mean? What is "our side"?

Author: but anyway, yes, I agree with removing this addition, as it is unneeded; of course we want the Content-Type header to match encoding/contentType, but if they don't there's nothing useful the deserializer can do about it now (as above, generating an error about this is not helpful assuming we were able to deserialize anyway).

(Also, I feel good that the original statement here is consistent with my assumption that the Content-Type header is the value we should prefer over anything else) :)

Reviewer: "our side" -> OAS tooling, the stuff that implements our requirements
"not our side" -> includes API behavior, although honestly I'm not sure I agree with my earlier point given the overall perspective of an OAD-as-contract.  There's a subtle distinction in that with OAD-as-contract it's the _mismatch_ that causes the error, but the error could be in either the contract or the API.  So _technically_ the OAS (by way of the OAD) is _not_ imposing a requirement on the API.  It's documenting an expectation, which could be erroneous either because the API is wrong or the expectation is wrong.

As you can tell, I'm thinking through this as I'm typing, so don't take it as any sort of settled law here.

Author: I think there's definitely room for a philosophical discussion here as to what we consider our scope and what we expect the OAD to actually prescribe.  I've been coming at things mostly from a "deserialize incoming requests and outgoing responses, and validate as much as we can" perspective, as that aligned with my previous JSON Schema work, but there's a lot more than that (and once I exhaust myself with deserializing, I'll be pivoting to thinking more about serializing and client generation).. but other tools have done a lot more various things with the OAD and perhaps made some wildly different interpretations on some points.

Author: one more thought: I do think we should call out the mismatch, but maybe an actual error (which in my tooling would cause a request to be rejected with an HTTP 400 error) might be too severe?  It's an interesting distinction between "we were able to deserialize this message completely using the data provided in the message, AND its deserialized form validated against the schema" and "something about the message's structure didn't match what the OAD said it should do".

Reviewer 3: How about 409 ?

##### Handling Multiple `contentType` Values

When multiple values are provided for `contentType`, parsing remains straightforward as the part's actual `Content-Type` is included in the document.

> 

Reviewer: Note from today's TDC call:  Let's make sure we're preservint the guidance that if `contentType` has multiple values and `Content-Type` matches _one of those values_, then the deserialization (@karenetheridge 's better term than "parsing" here) is straightforward.

##### Handling Multiple `contentType` Values

> When multiple values are provided for `contentType`, deserializing remains straightforward as the part's actual `Content-Type` SHOULD be included as a header of that part and SHOULD match one of the provided `contentType` values.

Reviewer: One tiny question regarding "SHOULD be included..." this "SHOULD" comes from the `multipart` specification, correct?  In which case we wouldn't use normative language as that is reserved for requirements we enforce, but would instead cite the relevant RFC.

For "SHOULD match one of the provided `contentType` values", this is obviously related to the OAS but we're talking about what the API sends, and I'm not sure we can put normative requirements on that either.  We put normative requirements on OAD authors and OAS implementors, so maybe:

```suggestion
When multiple values are provided for `contentType`, deserializing remains straightforward as, per [[RFC 2046]] [Section 5.1](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2046#section-5.1) each part will include a `Content-Type` header, or can reasonably be assumed to be `text/plain; charset=US-ASCII`.  To ensure interoperability, OAD authors SHOULD ensure that all reasonably expected media types are provided in `contentType`.
```

I think this says essentially the same thing, but defers to the `multipart` RFC for its behavior, and places the normative requirement on the OAD author rather than the API implementation, which I think is the place where we can require things.

Author: Okay, we normally just defer to the RFCs when applicable and don't go into the gory details, but I don't mind being explicit here. Let's just get this done. ;)
